Adding Unit testing docs and reference page (#4603)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/docs/build/unit-tests.md

---

> title: "Unit tests"

Reviewer: I'm wondering if this should go under "Build you DAG" (as it is right now) or under "Enhance your models" - thoughts?

cc: @dbeatty10

Reviewer: Could alt have one section for "tests" with two subsections "data tests" and "unit tests" (similar to how there's a subsection for models today):
<img width="279" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-09 at 8 57 18 AM" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/11d1b7f4-f058-4826-819e-832e5a5bc0b5">

Author: @graciegoheen  went with the suggestion of adding this to a folder titled "Tests" under "Build your DAG" with the data tests. If you all decide it should be moved to "Enhance your models" that's an easy fix too.

It is available now as an alpha feature for dbt Core v1.8 users.

:::

Historically, the test coverage capabilities of dbt were limited to “data” tests &dash; testing the quality of input data or the shape of the resulting datasets &mdash; that could only be executed *after* a model had been built. 

Now, we are introducing a new type of test to dbt - unit tests. In software programming, unit tests validate small portions of your functional code, and they work much the same way here. Unit tests allow you to validate your SQL modeling logic on a small set of static inputs _before_ you materialize your full model in production. Unit tests enable test-driven development, benefiting developer efficiency and code reliability. 

Let’s say you’re creating a new `dim_customers` model with a field `is_valid_email_address`, that calculates whether or not the customer’s email is valid: 

```sql
with customers as (

    select * from {{ ref('stg_customers') }}

),

accepted_email_domains as (

    select * from {{ ref('top_level_email_domains') }}

),
	
check_valid_emails as (

    select
        customers.customer_id,
        customers.first_name,
        customers.last_name,

> 				coalesce (regexp_like(

Reviewer: Spacing looks a bit odd in this SQL example

            customers.email, '^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'
        )
        = true
        and accepted_email_domains.tld is not null,
        false) as is_valid_email_address
    from customers
		left join accepted_email_domains
        on customers.email_top_level_domain = lower(accepted_email_domains.tld)

)

select * from check_valid_emails
```

This type of logic can be challenging to validate. Let’s add a unit test to this model to ensure our `is_valid_email_address` logic captures all known edge cases: emails without `.`, emails without `@`, and emails from invalid domains.

> ```yaml

Reviewer 2: Hey @matthewshaver We should include a filename here so it's clear where to put this. The reference example uses `<file name='dbt_project.yml'>` if that helps

Author: Good catch! Thank you

unit_tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
    description: "Check my is_valid_email_address logic captures all known edge cases - emails without ., emails without @, and emails from invalid domains."
    model: dim_customers
    given:
      - input: ref('stg_customers')
        rows:
          - {customer_id: 1, email: cool@example.com, email_top_level_domain: example.com}
          - {customer_id: 2, email: cool@unknown.com, email_top_level_domain: unknown.com}
          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```

> The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but there are a handful of different options for how you format your mock data. 

Reviewer: Would we want to link out to something about `format`?

Author: @graciegoheen did you have particular article in mind?

Reviewer: Not an article - just maybe somewhere we mention the accepted values for `format`

Reviewer: I think maybe just a section on the page for `format`? Similar to how there's a section for "storing test failures" on the data tests page?

You’ll notice that we _only_ had to define the mock data for the columns we care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

:::note

The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you’re able to execute the unit test.

> Use the `—-empty` flag to build an empty version of those models to save warehouse spend. 

Reviewer: Once we have docs for this flag, we should link to them!

Reviewer: <img width="228" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-09 at 8 54 18 AM" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/a4fe3ec3-614b-4872-a228-a0dba19513a8">

the double dashes look a bit odd her for some reason

```bash

> `dbt run —-select "stg_customers top_level_email_domains" --empty`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt run —-select "stg_customers top_level_email_domains" --empty
```

```

Alternatively, use `dbt build` to, in lineage order:

- Run the unit tests on your model.
- Materialize your model in the warehouse.
- Run the data tests on your model.

:::

Now we’re ready to run this unit test! We have a couple of options for commands depending on how specific we want to be: 

- `dbt test —-select dim_customers` runs _all_ of the tests on `dim_customers`.
- `dbt test —-select "dim_customers,test_type:unit"` runs all of the _unit_ tests on `dim_customers`.
- `dbt test —-select test_is_valid_email_address` runs the test named `test_is_valid_email_address`.

> [add screenshot]

Reviewer: @matthewshaver would you prefer these screenshots come from core or cloud IDE? I can also just copy/paste the logs if that's better?

Author: @graciegoheen I like the idea of copy/paste the logs so we don't have to commit to one product or the other

> [add screenshot]

Reviewer: Here's the logs to add:
```
dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:03:49  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:03:49  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:03:50  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:03:50  
16:03:50  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:03:50  
16:03:50  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:03:51  1 of 1 FAIL 1 dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ............................ [FAIL 1 in 0.26s]
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.67 seconds (0.67s).
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Completed with 1 error and 0 warnings:
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Failure in unit_test test_is_valid_email_address (models/marts/unit_tests.yml)
16:03:51    

actual differs from expected:

@@ ,customer_id,is_valid_email_address
→  ,1        ,True→False
   ,2        ,False
...,...      ,...

16:03:51  
16:03:51    compiled Code at models/marts/unit_tests.yml
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Done. PASS=0 WARN=0 ERROR=1 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1
```

> It looks like our clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as we thought as our model is incorrectly flagging `missingdot@gmailcom` as a valid email address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It looks like our clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as we thought as our model is incorrectly flagging `cool@example.com` as an invalid email address.
```

Updating our regex logic to `'^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'` (those darn escape characters!) and running the unit test again does the trick:

> [to add screenshot of example logs]

Reviewer: Here's the logs to add:
```
dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:09:11  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:09:12  
16:09:13  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:09:13  
16:09:13  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:09:13  1 of 1 PASS dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address .............................. [PASS in 0.26s]
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.75 seconds (0.75s).
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Completed successfully
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Done. PASS=1 WARN=0 ERROR=0 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1
```

          - {customer_id: 2, email: cool@unknown.com, email_top_level_domain: unknown.com}
          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```

The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but there are a handful of different options for how you format your mock data. 

You’ll notice that you only_had to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

:::note

The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you’re able to execute the unit test.

> Use the `—-empty` flag to build an empty version of those models to save warehouse spend. 

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `--empty` flag to build an empty version of those models to save warehouse spend. 
```

Now, we are introducing a new type of test to dbt - unit tests. In software programming, unit tests validate small portions of your functional code, and they work much the same way here. Unit tests allow you to validate your SQL modeling logic on a small set of static inputs _before_ you materialize your full model in production. Unit tests enable test-driven development, benefiting developer efficiency and code reliability. 

:::note Before you begin

- We currently only support unit testing SQL models.
- We currently only support adding unit tests to models in your _current_ project.
- If your model has multiple versions, be default the unit test will run on *all* versions of your model. Read [unit testing versioned models for more information](#unit-testing-versioned-models).

Read the [refernce doc](/reference/resource-properties/unit-tests) for more details about formatting your unit tests.
:::

Let’s say you’re creating a new `dim_customers` model with a field `is_valid_email_address`, that calculates whether or not the customer’s email is valid: 

> <file name='my_model.slq'>

Author: ```suggestion
<file name='dim_customers.slq'>
```

search_weight: "heavy"
id: "unit-tests"
keywords:
  - unit test, unit tests, unit testing, dag
---
:::note closed beta

Unit testing is currently in closed beta for dbt Cloud accounts that have updated to a [versionless environment](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud).

It is available now as an alpha feature for dbt Core v1.8 users.

:::

Historically, the test coverage capabilities of dbt were limited to “data” tests &dash; testing the quality of input data or the shape of the resulting datasets &mdash; that could only be executed *after* a model had been built. 

Now, we are introducing a new type of test to dbt - unit tests. In software programming, unit tests validate small portions of your functional code, and they work much the same way here. Unit tests allow you to validate your SQL modeling logic on a small set of static inputs _before_ you materialize your full model in production. Unit tests enable test-driven development, benefiting developer efficiency and code reliability. 

:::note Before you begin

- We currently only support unit testing SQL models.
- We currently only support adding unit tests to models in your _current_ project.

> - If your model has multiple versions, be default the unit test will run on *all* versions of your model. Read [unit testing versioned models for more information](#unit-testing-versioned-models).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- If your model has multiple versions, by default the unit test will run on *all* versions of your model. Read [unit testing versioned models for more information](#unit-testing-versioned-models).
```

> Read the [refernce doc](/reference/resource-properties/unit-tests) for more details about formatting your unit tests.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Read the [reference doc](/reference/resource-properties/unit-tests) for more details about formatting your unit tests.
```

:::

Let’s say you’re creating a new `dim_customers` model with a field `is_valid_email_address`, that calculates whether or not the customer’s email is valid: 

> <file name='dim_customers.slq'>

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<file name='dim_customers.sql'>
```

```yaml
unit_tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
    description: "Check my is_valid_email_address logic captures all known edge cases - emails without ., emails without @, and emails from invalid domains."
    model: dim_customers
    given:
      - input: ref('stg_customers')
        rows:
          - {customer_id: 1, email: cool@example.com, email_top_level_domain: example.com}
          - {customer_id: 2, email: cool@unknown.com, email_top_level_domain: unknown.com}
          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```

The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but there are a handful of different options for how you format your mock data. 

> You’ll notice that you only_had to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

Author: ```suggestion
Notice that you only have to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.
```

:::note

> The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you’re able to execute the unit test.

Author: ```suggestion
The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example, `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you can execute the unit test.
```

> Use the `--empty` flag to build an empty version of those models to save warehouse spend. 

Author: ```suggestion
Use the `--empty` flag to build an empty version of the models to save warehouse spend. 
```

```bash

dbt run —-select "stg_customers top_level_email_domains" --empty

```

Alternatively, use `dbt build` to, in lineage order:

- Run the unit tests on your model.
- Materialize your model in the warehouse.
- Run the data tests on your model.

> :::

Author: ```suggestion
```

> Now we’re ready to run this unit test! We have a couple of options for commands depending on how specific we want to be: 

Author: ```suggestion
Now you’re ready to run this unit test. You have a couple of options for commands depending on how specific you want to be: 
```

```bash

dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:03:49  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:03:49  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:03:50  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:03:50  
16:03:50  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:03:50  
16:03:50  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:03:51  1 of 1 FAIL 1 dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ............................ [FAIL 1 in 0.26s]
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.67 seconds (0.67s).
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Completed with 1 error and 0 warnings:
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Failure in unit_test test_is_valid_email_address (models/marts/unit_tests.yml)
16:03:51    

actual differs from expected:

@@ ,customer_id,is_valid_email_address
→  ,1        ,True→False
   ,2        ,False
...,...      ,...

16:03:51  
16:03:51    compiled Code at models/marts/unit_tests.yml
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Done. PASS=0 WARN=0 ERROR=1 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1

```

> It looks like the clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as we thought as the model is incorrectly flagging `missingdot@gmailcom` as a valid email address.

Author: ```suggestion
The clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as initially thought, as the model incorrectly flagged `missingdot@gmailcom` as a valid email address.
```

> Updating the regex logic to `'^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'` (those darn escape characters!) and running the unit test again solves the problem:

Author: ```suggestion
Updating the regex logic to `'^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'` (those pesky escape characters) and rerunning the unit test solves the problem:
```

```bash

dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:09:11  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:09:12  
16:09:13  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:09:13  
16:09:13  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:09:13  1 of 1 PASS dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address .............................. [PASS in 0.26s]
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.75 seconds (0.75s).
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Completed successfully
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Done. PASS=1 WARN=0 ERROR=0 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1

```

> Your model is now ready for production! Adding this unit test helped us catch an issue with the SQL logic _before_ you materialized `dim_customers` in your warehouse and will better ensure the reliability of this model in the future. 

Author: ```suggestion
Your model is now ready for production! Adding this unit test helped catch an issue with the SQL logic _before_ you materialized `dim_customers` in your warehouse and will better ensure the reliability of this model in the future. 
```

### Unit testing versioned models

> When a unit test is added to a model, with no supplied version, the unit test will run on all versions of the model.

Author: ```suggestion
When a unit test is added to a model, it will run on all versions of the model by default.
```

> Using the example on this page, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on all 3 versions.

Author: ```suggestion
Using the example in this article, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, the `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on all 3 versions.
```

> To to only unit test a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can include the desired version(s) in the model config:

Author: ```suggestion
To only unit test a specific version (or versions) of a model, include the desired version(s) in the model config:
```

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
      versions:
        include: 
          - 2
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

In this scenario, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2.

> To to unit test all versions except a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can exclude the relevant version(s) in the model config:

Author: ```suggestion
To unit test all versions except a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can exclude the relevant version(s) in the model config:
```

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
      versions:
        exclude: 
          - 1
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

> So if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2 and 3.

Author: ```suggestion
So, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ versions 2 and 3.
```

> If you want to unit test a model that references a pinned version of model, you should specify that in the ref of your input:

Author: ```suggestion
If you want to unit test a model that references the pinned version of the model, you should specify that in the `ref` of your input:
```

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

> ### Best practices for “when to add a unit test to your model”:

Author: ```suggestion
### When to add a unit test to your model
```

> 

Author: ```suggestion
There are a number of scenarios where unit testing a mode is appropriate, including:
```

> - when your SQL contains complex logic:

Author: ```suggestion
- When your SQL contains complex logic:
```

    - Regex
    - Date math
    - Window functions
    - `case when` statements when many `when`s
    - Truncation
    - Recursion
- Add a unit test for anything that feels like writing a function. For example, it involves your own logic processing the input.

>     - You wouldn't need to prioritize unit testing just calling `min()`, for example. That's already tested extensively by the warehouse and if something unexpected happens it's going to be a result of issues in the underlying data, so your fixture data in the unit test isn't going to help you.

Author: ```suggestion
    - For example, you wouldn't need to prioritize unit testing just calling `min()`. That's already been tested extensively by the warehouse. If something unexpected happens, it's going to be a result of issues in the underlying data, so your fixture data in the unit test isn't going to help you.
```

          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```

The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but there are a handful of different options for how you format your mock data. 

Notice that you only have to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

:::note

The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example, `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you can execute the unit test.

Use the `--empty` flag to build an empty version of the models to save warehouse spend. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
:::
```

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
      versions:
        include: 
          - 2
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

In this scenario, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2.

To unit test all versions except a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can exclude the relevant version(s) in the model config:

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
      versions:
        exclude: 
          - 1
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```
So, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ versions 2 and 3.

If you want to unit test a model that references the pinned version of the model, you should specify that in the `ref` of your input:

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test

>     model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    model: my_model # name of the model I am unit testing
```

    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

### When to add a unit test to your model

There are a number of scenarios where unit testing a mode is appropriate, including:
- When your SQL contains complex logic:
    - Regex
    - Date math
    - Window functions
    - `case when` statements when there are many `when`s
    - Truncation
    - Recursion
- Add a unit test for anything that feels like writing a function. For example, it involves your own logic processing the input.
    - For example, you wouldn't need to prioritize unit testing just calling `min()`. That's already been tested extensively by the warehouse. If something unexpected happens, it's going to be a result of issues in the underlying data, so your fixture data in the unit test isn't going to help you.
- Logic for which you had bugs reported before.
- Edge cases not yet seen in your actual data that you want to handle.
- Prior to refactoring the transformation logic (especially if the refactor is significant).

> - Models with high “criticality” (public, contracted models or models directly upstream of an exposure).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Models with high "criticality" (public, contracted models or models directly upstream of an exposure).
```

---
title: "Unit tests"
sidebar_label: "Unit tests"

> description: "Read this tutorial to learn how to use unit tests on your SQL models."

Reviewer 2: You can simplify this.
```suggestion
description: "Learn how to use unit tests on your SQL models."
```

Author: This is the language we use for other articles in this section - should we change it there too or adhere to the template here?

Reviewer 2: @matthewshaver  I'd change it. This is leftover form tutorials which we don't call guides anymore and this isn't even a guide.

search_weight: "heavy"
id: "unit-tests"
keywords:
  - unit test, unit tests, unit testing, dag
---
:::note closed beta

Unit testing is currently in closed beta for dbt Cloud accounts that have updated to a [versionless environment](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud).

It is available now as an alpha feature for dbt Core v1.8 users.

:::

> Historically, the test coverage capabilities of dbt were limited to “data” tests &dash; testing the quality of input data or the shape of the resulting datasets &mdash; that could only be executed *after* a model had been built. 

Reviewer: should we link to the docs for data tests?

Author: ```suggestion
Historically, the test coverage capabilities of dbt were limited to [“data” tests](/docs/build/data-tests) &dash; testing the quality of input data or the shape of the resulting datasets &mdash; that could only be executed _after_ a model had been built. 
```

> Historically, the test coverage capabilities of dbt were limited to [“data” tests](/docs/build/data-tests) &dash; testing the quality of input data or the shape of the resulting datasets &mdash; that could only be executed _after_ a model had been built. 

Reviewer 2: The dashes make this hard to read.
```suggestion
Historically, dbt's test coverage was confined to [“data” tests](/docs/build/data-tests), assessing the quality of input data or resulting datasets' structure. However, these tests could only be executed _after_ a building a model. 
```

Now, we are introducing a new type of test to dbt - unit tests. In software programming, unit tests validate small portions of your functional code, and they work much the same way here. Unit tests allow you to validate your SQL modeling logic on a small set of static inputs _before_ you materialize your full model in production. Unit tests enable test-driven development, benefiting developer efficiency and code reliability. 

> :::note Before you begin

Reviewer 2: There are too many notes on this page, making the content hard to read. Let's just make this a section
```suggestion
## Before you begin
```

- We currently only support unit testing SQL models.
- We currently only support adding unit tests to models in your _current_ project.

> - If your model has multiple versions, by default the unit test will run on *all* versions of your model. Read [unit testing versioned models for more information](#unit-testing-versioned-models).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- If your model has multiple versions, by default the unit test will run on *all* versions of your model. Read [unit testing versioned models](#unit-testing-versioned-models) for more information.
```

Read the [reference doc](/reference/resource-properties/unit-tests) for more details about formatting your unit tests.

> :::

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer 2: This feels weird floating here. Let's add a heading
```suggestion

## Example model with unit test

```

Author: How about something like this
```suggestion

## Unit testing a model

```

> Let’s say you’re creating a new `dim_customers` model with a field `is_valid_email_address`, that calculates whether or not the customer’s email is valid: 

Reviewer 2: We usually steer clear of "let's" but we should use present and no person: "This example creates" or second person ("you can create")
```suggestion
This example creates a new `dim_customers` model with a field `is_valid_email_address` that calculates whether or not the customer’s email is valid: 
```

Author: I thought I caught all of those! Thank you

<file name='dim_customers.sql'>

```sql
with customers as (

    select * from {{ ref('stg_customers') }}

),

accepted_email_domains as (

    select * from {{ ref('top_level_email_domains') }}

),
	
check_valid_emails as (

    select
        customers.customer_id,
        customers.first_name,
        customers.last_name,
	coalesce (regexp_like(
            customers.email, '^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'
        )
        = true
        and accepted_email_domains.tld is not null,
        false) as is_valid_email_address
    from customers
		left join accepted_email_domains
        on customers.email_top_level_domain = lower(accepted_email_domains.tld)

)

select * from check_valid_emails
```
</file>

> This type of logic can be challenging to validate. You can add a unit test to this model to ensure your `is_valid_email_address` logic captures all known edge cases: emails without `.`, emails without `@`, and emails from invalid domains.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The logic posed in the previous example can be challenging to validate. You can add a unit test to this model to ensure the `is_valid_email_address` logic captures all known edge cases: emails without `.`, emails without `@`, and emails from invalid domains.
```

Author: This, to me, reads like we're referencing the example that came before the one we just finished going through. How about
```suggestion
The logic posed in this example can be challenging to validate. You can add a unit test to this model to ensure the `is_valid_email_address` logic captures all known edge cases: emails without `.`, emails without `@`, and emails from invalid domains.
```

<file name='dbt_project.yml'> 

```yaml
unit_tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
    description: "Check my is_valid_email_address logic captures all known edge cases - emails without ., emails without @, and emails from invalid domains."
    model: dim_customers
    given:
      - input: ref('stg_customers')
        rows:
          - {customer_id: 1, email: cool@example.com, email_top_level_domain: example.com}
          - {customer_id: 2, email: cool@unknown.com, email_top_level_domain: unknown.com}
          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```
</file>

> The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but you can also use `csv` either inline or in a separate fixture file. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The previous example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but you can also use `csv` either inline or in a separate fixture file. 
```

> The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but there are a handful of different options for how you format your mock data. 

Author: ```suggestion
The above example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but you can also use `csv` either inline or in a separate fixture file. 
```

> Notice that you only have to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You only have to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.
```

Updating the regex logic to `'^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'` (those pesky escape characters) and rerunning the unit test solves the problem:

```bash

dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:09:11  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:09:12  
16:09:13  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:09:13  
16:09:13  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:09:13  1 of 1 PASS dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address .............................. [PASS in 0.26s]
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.75 seconds (0.75s).
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Completed successfully
16:09:13  
16:09:13  Done. PASS=1 WARN=0 ERROR=0 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1

```

Your model is now ready for production! Adding this unit test helped catch an issue with the SQL logic _before_ you materialized `dim_customers` in your warehouse and will better ensure the reliability of this model in the future. 

> ### Unit testing versioned models

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Unit testing versioned models
```

      versions:
        include: 
          - 2
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

In this scenario, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2.

To unit test all versions except a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can exclude the relevant version(s) in the model config:

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing
      versions:
        exclude: 
          - 1
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```
So, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ versions 2 and 3.

If you want to unit test a model that references the pinned version of the model, you should specify that in the `ref` of your input:

```yml

unit-tests:
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test
    model: my_model # name of the model I am unit testing
    given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

```

> ### When to add a unit test to your model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### When to add unit tests
```

Author: I think we kind of want to stress as much as possible that this is only available for model so that there is no confusion about language between these and data tests. It might benefit us to keep this language

Reviewer 2: OK sounds good!

> ### When to add a unit test to your model

Reviewer 2: We should move this section to right after "Before you begin" because they will need this info before looking at the example. 

Also, this section needs to be fleshed out more with examples. Like "Logic for which you had bugs reported before." what do we mean by that? It's very vague

> There are a number of scenarios where unit testing a mode is appropriate, including:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You should unit test a model:
```

- When your SQL contains complex logic:
    - Regex
    - Date math
    - Window functions
    - `case when` statements when there are many `when`s
    - Truncation
    - Recursion

> - Add a unit test for anything that feels like writing a function. For example, it involves your own logic processing the input.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- When you're writing custom logic to process input data, similar to creating a function.
```

>     - For example, you wouldn't need to prioritize unit testing just calling `min()`. That's already been tested extensively by the warehouse. If something unexpected happens, it's going to be a result of issues in the underlying data, so your fixture data in the unit test isn't going to help you.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- We don't recommend conducting unit testing for functions like `min()` since these functions are tested extensively by the warehouse. If an unexpected issue arises, it's more likely a result of issues in the underlying data rather than the function itself. Therefore, fixture data in the unit test won't provide valuable information.
```

- Logic for which you had bugs reported before.
- Edge cases not yet seen in your actual data that you want to handle.
- Prior to refactoring the transformation logic (especially if the refactor is significant).
- Models with high "criticality" (public, contracted models or models directly upstream of an exposure).

> 

Reviewer: Thoughts on one more section here on "When to run your unit tests" cc: @dbeatty10 

Like the general best practice on "run your unit tests in dev / ci" but not in prod - and maybe some thoughts/best practices around warehouse sizing?

Author: Will add to the fast follow issue

---
title: "Unit tests"
sidebar_label: "Unit tests"

> description: "Learn how to use unit tests on your SQL models."

Reviewer: ![Screenshot 2024-02-14 at 11 02 21 AM](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/187f9092-825f-4ae2-a4a0-9280e02aa573)

I can see this on version 1.7 - is that expected?

Author: @graciegoheen  Yes, we made this call because versionless Cloud users aren't necessarily going to know to choose the 1.8 documentation to view this feature, so we made it visible for all. If you'd rather this whole page be versioned, we can do that, but I think views and discoverability will take a hit

Reviewer: Nope that makes sense, just wanted to confirm it was intentional!

          - {customer_id: 3, email: badgmail.com, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
          - {customer_id: 4, email: missingdot@gmailcom, email_top_level_domain: gmail.com}
      - input: ref('top_level_email_domains')
        rows:
          - {tld: example.com}
          - {tld: gmail.com}
    expect:
      rows:
        - {customer_id: 1, is_valid_email_address: true}
        - {customer_id: 2, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 3, is_valid_email_address: false}
        - {customer_id: 4, is_valid_email_address: false}

```
</file>

The previous example defines the mock data using the inline `dict` format, but you can also use `csv` either inline or in a separate fixture file. 

You only have to define the mock data for the columns you care about. This enables you to write succinct and _specific_ unit tests.

:::note

The direct parents of the model that you’re unit testing (in this example, `stg_customers` and `top_level_email_domains`) need to exist in the warehouse before you can execute the unit test.

Use the `--empty` flag to build an empty version of the models to save warehouse spend. 

```bash

> dbt run —-select "stg_customers top_level_email_domains" --empty

Reviewer: ```suggestion
dbt run --select "stg_customers top_level_email_domains" --empty
```

```

Alternatively, use `dbt build` to, in lineage order:

- Run the unit tests on your model.
- Materialize your model in the warehouse.
- Run the data tests on your model.

:::

Now you’re ready to run this unit test. You have a couple of options for commands depending on how specific you want to be: 

> - `dbt test —-select dim_customers` runs _all_ of the tests on `dim_customers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dbt test --select dim_customers` runs _all_ of the tests on `dim_customers`.
```

Formatting is weird for all of the `--` on this page - we should go through and update them

![Screenshot 2024-02-14 at 11 06 42 AM](https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/dced3b18-0b81-46ed-97aa-6b11f48b5a6c)

> - `dbt test —-select "dim_customers,test_type:unit"` runs all of the _unit_ tests on `dim_customers`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dbt test --select "dim_customers,test_type:unit"` runs all of the _unit_ tests on `dim_customers`.
```

> - `dbt test —-select test_is_valid_email_address` runs the test named `test_is_valid_email_address`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address` runs the test named `test_is_valid_email_address`.
```

```bash

dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:03:49  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:03:49  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:03:50  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:03:50  
16:03:50  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:03:50  
16:03:50  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
16:03:51  1 of 1 FAIL 1 dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ............................ [FAIL 1 in 0.26s]
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.67 seconds (0.67s).
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Completed with 1 error and 0 warnings:
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Failure in unit_test test_is_valid_email_address (models/marts/unit_tests.yml)
16:03:51    

actual differs from expected:

> @@ ,customer_id,is_valid_email_address

Reviewer: Nit-pick:
the actual logs have some specific formatting (color + bolding) to make this error message clearer to read - would it be possible to include that formatting here?

<img width="940" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-14 at 10 30 45 AM" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/3c66f028-0faf-4b5b-a4e1-feae7745394c">

- "Fail 1" is red
- "Complete with 1 error and 0 warnings:" is red
- "Failure in unit_test test_is_valid_email_address (models/marts/unit_tests.yml)" is red
- "actual" is green
- "expected" is red
- "True" is red and bold
- "False" is green and bold

Author: We're limited by the docusaurus formatting. Will add a screenshot as a follow up if we wish to preserve our format

→  ,1        ,True→False
   ,2        ,False
...,...      ,...

16:03:51  
16:03:51    compiled Code at models/marts/unit_tests.yml
16:03:51  
16:03:51  Done. PASS=0 WARN=0 ERROR=1 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1

```

> The clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as initially thought, as the model incorrectly flagged `missingdot@gmailcom` as a valid email address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The clever regex statement wasn’t as clever as initially thought, as the model incorrectly flagged `cool@example.com` (customer 1's email) as an invalid email address.
```

Updating the regex logic to `'^[A-Za-z0-9._%+-]+@[A-Za-z0-9.-]+\.[A-Za-z]{2,}$'` (those pesky escape characters) and rerunning the unit test solves the problem:

```bash

dbt test --select test_is_valid_email_address
16:09:11  Running with dbt=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Registered adapter: postgres=1.8.0-a1
16:09:12  Found 6 models, 5 seeds, 4 data tests, 0 sources, 0 exposures, 0 metrics, 410 macros, 0 groups, 0 semantic models, 1 unit test
16:09:12  
16:09:13  Concurrency: 5 threads (target='postgres')
16:09:13  

> 16:09:13  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16:09:13  1 of 1 START unit_test dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address ................... [RUN]
```

> 16:09:13  1 of 1 PASS dim_wizards::test_is_valid_email_address .............................. [PASS in 0.26s]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
16:09:13  1 of 1 PASS dim_customers::test_is_valid_email_address .............................. [PASS in 0.26s]
```

16:09:13  
16:09:13  Finished running 1 unit_test in 0 hours 0 minutes and 0.75 seconds (0.75s).
16:09:13  

> 16:09:13  Completed successfully

Reviewer: Same nit-pick as above:
<img width="947" alt="Screenshot 2024-02-14 at 10 31 48 AM" src="https://github.com/dbt-labs/docs.getdbt.com/assets/53586774/de1d63cd-8ff7-4c34-8bda-b92d88137ff4">

- "PASS" is green
- "Completed successfully" is green

Author: Spoke with @graciegoheen in Slack - TLDR; we're limited by Docusaurus formatting. If necessary, I will add a screenshot as a follow-up to preserve the DBT formatting.

16:09:13  
16:09:13  Done. PASS=1 WARN=0 ERROR=0 SKIP=0 TOTAL=1

```

Your model is now ready for production! Adding this unit test helped catch an issue with the SQL logic _before_ you materialized `dim_customers` in your warehouse and will better ensure the reliability of this model in the future. 

## Unit testing versioned models

When a unit test is added to a model, it will run on all versions of the model by default.

> Using the example in this article, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, the `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on all 3 versions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the example in this article, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `dim_customers`, the `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on all 3 versions.
```

To only unit test a specific version (or versions) of a model, include the desired version(s) in the model config:

```yml

> unit-tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unit_tests::
```

>   - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
```

>     model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    model: dim_customers
```

      versions:
        include: 
          - 2

>     given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ...
```

```

> In this scenario, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, `my test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this scenario, if you have version 1, 2, and 3 of `dim_customers `, my `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ version 2.
```

To unit test all versions except a specific version (or versions) of a model, you can exclude the relevant version(s) in the model config:

```yml

> unit-tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unit_tests:
```

>   - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
```

>     model: my_model # name of the model I'm unit testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    model: dim_customers
```

      versions:
        exclude: 
          - 1

>     given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ...
```

```

> So, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `my_model`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ versions 2 and 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
So, if you have versions 1, 2, and 3 of `dim_customers`, your `test_is_valid_email_address` unit test will run on _only_ versions 2 and 3.
```

If you want to unit test a model that references the pinned version of the model, you should specify that in the `ref` of your input:

```yml

> unit-tests:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
unit_tests:
```

>   - name: test_is_valid_email_address # this is the unique name of the test

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - name: test_is_valid_email_address
```

>     model: my_model # name of the model I am unit testing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    model: dim_customers
```

>     given: # optional: list of inputs to provide as fixtures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    given: 
      - input: ref('stg_customers', v=1)
      ...
```
